# Practical Web API Design Workshop

University of Illinois WebCon April 27th 2016

Wes Cravens, Marty Kane, Aaron Lee & John McCaffrey

## Synopsis

Web based APIs have emerged as the defacto standard for powering our
applications across several clients.  We use our Web APIs to power our
mobile platform applications, our browser client applications,
automation systems, b2b exchanges and much more.  There is a surge of
business logic moving from behind closed curtains out into the World
Wide Web where it can be leveraged and consumed in unimaginable ways.
Some go as far as to suggest that the 'API Economy' is the new frontier
in the Information Age.

This workshop will outline the most practical strategies and
technologies that we should consider while designing and building our
APIs.  Know to what extent you should consider the original Fielding
constraints (RESTful design) and know when to make trade-offs.  You're
main goal should be to build a successful and consumer friendly API that
is still flexible and change tolerant.  We'll explore practical answers
to these difficult decisions.

### Topics





  + Overview of the Fielding Constraints
  + Modeling your problem domain
  + Hypermedia as the Expression of Application State (HATEOS)
  + What is a resource?  Good endpoint design
  + HTTP Verbs - The reality
  + Value flexibility and consumption over perfection. Why 'perfection' is unrealistic?

## Required Tooling

Our workshop is designed to leverage tools that you can use online wiht
a browser any time.  However we've all been to conferences before, so we
know that it's wise to not be 100% reliant on a functional internet
connection espectially if you're asking 60 people to download and
install tooling before hand.  So with that in mind we've also chosen
tools that can be used offline using simple local webservers that can
run on our laptops.

Installing these items before the workshop will help us all support each
other in the event that there are any network connection discrepancies
during our workshop.

### Tools

  + Git
  + Chrome
  + Postman
  + Node

### Workshop Tools

  + This repository
  + Gitter
  + Some command to run


## Workshop agenda and timetable

###  8:45 -  9:00 Seating and assistance with Tool installation

###  9:00 -  9:05 Greetings and Introduction to the Workshop

###  9:05 -  9:20 Why HTTP APIs are Valuable & The Core Components of an API

###  9:20 -  9:30 Exercise 1 - Explore Aspects of a Few Popular APIs

###  9:30 -  9:40 The anatomy of an API Call and Demo of Postman 

###  9:40 - 10:00 Exercise 2 - Test and Explore APIs with Postman 

### 10:00 - 10:15 The Components of an HTTP API Domain

### 10:15 - 10:35 Exercise 3 - Convert the Resources of your Domain into an API

### 10:35 - 10:45 Break 

### 10:45 - 11:00 Exercise 4 - Swap APIs with an other Group for them to Review 

### 11:00 - 11:10 Exercies 5 - Bring Groups Together to Discuss the APIs

### 11:10 - 11:15 Documentation and the Open API Specification

### 11:15 - 11:35 Specify, Serve and Explore your API

### 11:35 - 11:45 Avoild Perfection Paralysis and Malcontents

### 11:45 - 12:00 Wrap up, Q&A

## Introduction to Workshop and Getting Started

## References

### Workshop Documentation

 * [Workshop Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1vAycalIQMX1a1j6GefYy11mcRCQujM5-jEx69aczziQ/edit?usp=sharing)

### Periodicals & Blogs

### Talks & Papers

### Books

<a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/"><img alt="Creative Commons License" style="border-width:0" src="https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by/4.0/80x15.png" /></a><br /><span xmlns:dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" property="dct:title">Practical Web API Design</span> by <a xmlns:cc="http://creativecommons.org/ns#" href="https://github.com/cucode/practical_web_api_design_UoI_WebCon_2016" property="cc:attributionName" rel="cc:attributionURL">Wes Cravens, Marty Kane, Aaron Lee & John McCaffrey</a> is licensed under a <a rel="license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/">Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License</a>.<br />Based on a work at <a xmlns:dct="http://purl.org/dc/terms/" href="https://github.com/cucode/practical_web_api_design_UoI_WebCon_2016" rel="dct:source">https://github.com/cucode/practical_web_api_design_UoI_WebCon_2016</a>.
